new guide - transaction failures (#483)
helium/docs: docs/wallets/app-wallet/transaction-failures.mdx

---
id: transaction-failures
title: Transaction Failures
sidebar_label: Types of Transaction Failures
slug: /wallets/app-wallet/transaction-failures
---

import useBaseUrl from "@docusaurus/useBaseUrl";

# Types of Transaction Failures

The Helium app automatically notifies users whenever a transaction fails. Transactions can fail for a number of reasons - the most common is typically insufficient funds (not enough $HNT in the wallet) or a nonce issue.

:::note

What is a nonce?

> Nonce is a number included in every transaction to guarantee the data is "live" and not replayed, preventing the blockchain from replay attacks. The Helium app uses a speculative nonce, which increments for every type of transaction. In some cases, the blockchain's transaction manager processes these transactions out of order, that causes some transactions to fail.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nonce is a number included in every transaction to guarantee the data is "live" and not replayed, preventing the blockchain from replay attacks. The Helium app uses a speculative nonce, which increments for every type of transaction. In some cases, the blockchain's transaction manager processes these transactions out of order which causes some transactions to fail.
```

:::

## Payment Transaction Failures

### Wrong Transaction Fee

`{invalid,wrong_txn_fee}`

Transaction fees are required on the network to prevent spamming. These fees use Data Credits (DC) and the Helium app uses [implicit burn](https://docs.helium.com/blockchain/transaction-fees/#transaction-fees-and-implicit-burn) to determine the appropriate amount of HNT to burn to generate these DCs.

> How much HNT to burn, depends on the [Oracle price](https://docs.helium.com/blockchain/oracles/#hnt-price-oracles). The Oracle price is the median $HNT from a list of individual oracles and used to weather large swings in price. In special cases, the price of $HNT may shift enough in a short time period such that the amount of HNT burned to generate DCs *is not enough*. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
How much HNT to burn depends on the [Oracle price](https://docs.helium.com/blockchain/oracles/#hnt-price-oracles). The Oracle price is the median $HNT price from a list of individual oracles and used to weather large swings in price. In special cases, the price of $HNT may shift enough in a short time period such that the amount of HNT burned to generate DCs *is not enough*. 
```

:::info

1 DC = $0.00001 HNT

:::

**Recommended Fix:** If you see this failure, the best thing to do is to first confirm the transaction did not occur (check your wallet balance), then submit the payment transaction again.

### Invalid Nonce

`{invalid,invalid_nonce}`

If you see this error message for payment transactions, it could mean that multiple payments were sent in quick succession without waiting for the prior payment to clear.

**Recommended Fix:** We recommend sending payments one at a time and waiting for it to clear before attempting the next.

The core developers are actively looking at ways to improve this experience.

## Transfer Hotspot Transaction Failures

Please check out the [Transfer Hotspot Guide](https://docs.helium.com/wallets/app-wallet/transfer-hotspot/) for full instructions and best practices.

### Gateway Too Stale

`{invalid,gateway_too_stale}`

> Due to the decentralized nature of the Helium network, it’s important that owners and new owners of Hotspots know what they’re getting is a functional unit that is able to sync the blockchain and participate in PoC (the way Hotspots mine $HNT). Before transferring a Hotspot, the blockchain checks to see if it has had recent activity in the last 1200 blocks. Activity counts as creating a challenge, witnessing a challenge, or sending a beacon. It also checks that it’s fully synced to the blockchain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to the decentralized nature of the Helium network, it’s important that owners and new owners of Hotspots know what they’re getting is a functional unit that is able to sync the blockchain and participate in PoC (the way Hotspots mine $HNT). Before transferring a Hotspot, the blockchain checks to see if it has had recent activity in the last 1200 blocks (approximately 20 hours). Activity counts as creating a challenge, witnessing a challenge, or sending a beacon. It also checks that it’s fully synced to the blockchain.
```

> If you see this notification, it means the the Hotspot you’re about to purchase has not shown “proof of life” recently. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you see this notification, it means the the Hotspot you’re about to transfer has not shown “proof of life” recently. 
```

> **Recommended Fix:** Notify the person you’re purchasing this Hotspot from that they should plug the Hotspot back into internet and monitor the Hotspot for activity before trying again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Recommended Fix:** Notify the other person involved in the transfer of this Hotspot from that they should conect the Hotspot back into Internet and monitor the Hotspot for activity before trying again.
```
